SELF LEADERSHIP

Effective service leaders reveal themselves through
character
relationships
knowledge
intuition
experience
past success
ability

Three important attributes that enhance these qualities are 

setting personal business goals
using constructive self-criticism
identifying learning and growth opportunities

--------------------------------------------------------

SETTING PERSONAL BUSINESS GOALS

Personal business goals can be as simple as deciding you will greet everyone with "How are you today?or ending the transaction with "Have a nice day. It may sound cliche but these simple niceties can in most cases help to start the visit off on a courteous, positive note.

Thinking back to engaging with our applicants/students take a moment to decide for yourself three changes you want to make in how you deal with visitors.  Record them separately or in your Outlook calendar so you can refer to them in a month or two to gauge your progress.

You can also use the feedback from Peer Coaching to identify 3 areas you want to improve.

----------------------------------------------------------   

CONSTRUCTIVE CRITICISM

Everyone has difficult days; we must remind ourselves of our strengths and positive attributes.  If we feel confident then it carries through to our interactions with visitors and staff.  
One of the most powerful influences on your attitude and personality is what you say to yourself. It is not what happens to you, but how you respond internally to what happens to you, that determines your thoughts, feelings, and your actions.
An easy way to start is to think of problems as situations.  For example, if you are having difficulty implementing your personal business goals rather than thinking "I'm never going to get it right.break the situation down to discover what aspect of implementing your goals is presenting a challenge and find a solution.When you realize you've made a mistake, take immediate steps to correct it.  Figure out what you can do differently next time and don't be afraid to ask others for their input.
And dealing with criticisms from other people becomes easier because you are no longer sensitive and have become approachable. You accept them as constructive criticisms and consider them as useful feedback to further your growth and development. 

LEARNING AND GROWTH
Looking for new learning opportunities allows you to maintain your interest and enthusiasm.  Learning opportunities can be formal such as courses and workshops, or informal such as talking with your colleagues or reading related articles.----------------------------------------------------------  
SERVICE STANDARDS
COMMUNICATIONS
JOB TIPS
OUR WORKPLACE
----------------------------------------------------------

COMMUNICATIONS

Communication is what Customer Care is all about.  Whether it is spoken, written, or non-verbal communication they all contribute to the success or lack of success in an interaction with a customer.

The three critical factors in Communication are:

Listening Skills
Questioning Skills
Manners & Etiquette

-----------------------------------------------------------

LISTENING

Key points to Listening
Open the Door: Recognise and welcome the customer
Smile!  Whether on the phone or in person a smile will help the tone of your voice and your manner.  Clients have indicated through comment cards that they greatly appreciate smiling staff and feel welcome.
Pay attention to body language and eye contact (where applicable)
Avoid Distractions - Focus on person speaking
Look right at the customer; if you are on the phone find a way to concentrate on the person, their voice, and their concerns.  Try to avoid any unnecessary distractions.
Let them tell their story - Do not Interrupt
Each student is a fresh start; the student in front of you does not know he/she is asking the same question that you've been asked 300+ before.
Validate and Summarize
Particularly if the question is complex it is important to verify that you have understood all the pieces.
Students don't necessarily know what information is important or pertinent and what isn't.
Understand vs. judge
Understand: to grasp the information you are given
Judge: to form an opinion of
Work consciously to understand what the student is saying versus the natural tendency of judging – approving or disapproving what is said does not allow you to absorb what is actually said.

-----------------------------------------------------------

LISTENING (Continued)

Key points to Listening
Listen with your eyes and body
Not only will body language show you are listening, but it will also help you to listen better. If you move closer you can hear better and not be distracted as easily. If you maintain eye contact you will be less likely to be distracted by something you see around you.
Avoid fidgeting as this can show your lack of interest or that you are getting bored.
By listening with your eyes, paying attention to the visitor's body language, their nonverbal facial and body movements or hand gestures you can see what the whole body is trying to tell you, not just the mouth!
- (Terry Pruner, Kane Mackay & Associates, 2008)

-----------------------------------------------------------

HOW TO LISTEN

Top Down Listening
Top-down strategies are listener based; the listener taps into background knowledge of the topic, the situation or context, the type of text, and the language. This background knowledge activates a set of expectations that help the listener to interpret what is heard and anticipate what will come next.  
Top-down strategies include:
Listening for the main idea 
Predicting 
Drawing inferences 
Summarizing

Bottom up Listening
Bottom-up strategies are text based; the listener relies on the language in the message, that is, the combination of sounds, words, and grammar that creates meaning.
Bottom-up strategies include:
Listening for specific details
Recognizing alternative terms:
For example, the student says he/she wants their grades instead of asking for an official transcript
Recognizing word-order patterns

- (Terry Pruner, Kane Mackay & Associates, 2008)

-----------------------------------------------------------
QUESTIONING TECHNIQUES

OPEN
Open questions invite the student to present in their own words and way what is their concern or issue.  They hand control of the conversation to the customer.

Please tell me more...
What is your concern?

-----------------------------------------------------------
QUESTIONING TECHNIQUES

CLOSED
Closed questions general are designed to extract very specific information.  They give you facts.  These are often called the yes/no questions.

When did you apply?
Did you apply through OCAS?
Did you submit your documentation?

-----------------------------------------------------------
QUESTIONING TECHNIQUES

PROBING
Probing questions dig for more detail that leads to clarification, completeness of understanding, and accuracy.  This can be accomplished through a number of techniques:

Clarification: 
When they are vague or have not given enough information, seek to
further understand them by asking for clarification.
What exactly did you mean by 'XXX'?

-----------------------------------------------------------
QUESTIONING TECHNIQUES

PROBING
Probing questions dig for more detail that leads to clarification, completeness of understanding, and accuracy.  This can be accomplished through a number of techniques:

Purpose: 
Sometimes they say things where the purpose of why they said it is not
clear. Ask them to explain their statement or dig for underlying information.
Why did you say that?
	
-----------------------------------------------------------
QUESTIONING TECHNIQUES

PROBING
Probing questions dig for more detail that leads to clarification, completeness of understanding, and accuracy.  This can be accomplished through a number of techniques:

Rephrasing: 
Repeating back parts of what someone has said to you shows them you listened.

It also helps you to comprehend what was said better. If you misunderstood
this will let the speaker know and then it can be clarified. You also show you
are interested by taking their words and repeating them back. It shows you
were really focused on what they said.
	
-----------------------------------------------------------
QUESTIONING TECHNIQUES

PROBING
Probing questions dig for more detail that leads to clarification, completeness of understanding, and accuracy.  This can be accomplished through a number of techniques:

Chunking Down: 
getting more detail by probing for more information about the high-level
information you already have. The goal is to fill in the empty gaps in your
picture, test the reality of the situation, and so on.

You mentioned that you applied to the program in February and received a
conditional acceptance letter in April.  Did the letter mention any documents
or testing you would need to submit or complete before receiving a final offer?

-----------------------------------------------------------
QUESTIONING TECHNIQUES

PROBING
Probing questions dig for more detail that leads to clarification, completeness of understanding, and accuracy.  This can be accomplished through a number of techniques:

Extension: 
When they have not given you enough information about something, ask them to tell you more.
Could you tell me more about that, please?
I'm not sure I have the complete picture.  Could you give me some more details please?
(Terry Pruner, Kane Mackay & Associates, 2008)

-----------------------------------------------------------
MANAGING REFERRALS & ESCALATIONS

Often in our dealings with a student we need to refer them to another department or escalate the issue.  Students can become very frustrated and angry if they are bounced from person to person.
To minimize that frustration, when we refer them to another department we need to ensure we follow the GBC standards for referrals:
What: provide a written referral on the Student Services & Campus Life referral card and ensure they understand any additional material/forms required
How: be clear and concise in the reason for the referral
Who: clearly indicate who they should see provide your contact information (email) and contact information for the person to whom who are referring them (email and phone number)
Where: explain where they are to go with specific directions

-----------------------------------------------------------
MANAGING REFERRALS & ESCALATIONS

Often in our dealings with a student we need to refer them to another department or escalate the issue.  Students can become very frustrated and angry if they are bounced from person to person.
To minimize that frustration, when we refer them to another department we need to ensure we follow the GBC standards for referrals:
Close: invite them to come back if they have any additional problems or require more info.
Creating customer satisfaction is not only about what we can do for them while they are in front of us but also how we can assist them through the whole process.

-----------------------------------------------------------
MANNERS & ETIQUETTE

As outdated as it sounds, first impressions count a lot.  It all begins with how we answer the phone or greet someone in person.

Manners and etiquette are that set of written and unwritten rules of conduct that make interactions run more smoothly.  Sometimes it can be hard to remember that when being inundated with questions, calls, or complaints.  However you will find if you are polite and respectful the person you are dealing with is more likely to treat you in the same way.

Say "Please" and "Thank you" often.  It shows respect and appreciation.  In addition, if you are thanked, then say "You're welcome."
Answer the phone or acknowledge the presence of others quickly
Make eye contact and offer an approachable smile.

You mentioned that you applied to the program in February and received a conditional acceptance letter in April.  Did the letter mention any documents or testing you would need to submit or complete before receiving a final offer?
	
Rapid speech suggests impatience.  It is difficult to follow in face-to-face conversation, and often necessitates repeating yourself.
Slow speech, in contrast, conveys an impression of lethargy, forgetfulness, and a lack of interest.
If you are on the phone, it is easy to fall into the trap of believing that because your customer can't see you, they won't be affected by what you are doing.  Apply the same rules of conduct to the telephone as you would with a person in front of you.
Use a warm and cooperative tone of voice.  With practice it is possible to remove irritation from your voice.  The following exercise will help.
Deep Breathing: If you find your voice (or delivery) is turning people away	and slowing you down, lean back and take 60 seconds to breath deeply.
As you relax, breathe in very slowly.  Hold your breath for a few seconds.
Breathe out slowly, slowly.  Repeat for 60 seconds.
- (Terry Pruner, Kane Mackay & Associates, 2008)

-----------------------------------------------------------
ETHICS & DIVERSITY

One of the core George Brown College values is diversity and respect.  In our Path to Leadership we state
We show mutual respect for each other within the community of GBC including all of our stakeholders, in all of our behaviour.

According to Statistics Canada, in 2006, 20% of Canada's population was foreign-born.  Between January 1, 2001 to May 16, 2006 Canada received 1.1 million immigrants.  In the city of Toronto, one in two residents were born outside Canada.

Diversity however is not related solely to diverse cultural and religious backgrounds.  At GBC our community embraces all forms of diversity – cultural, religious, socioeconomic, sex, sexual orientation, age, ability, marital status, and family status.  We are a unique educational and work experience because of our diversity.

As service providers it is important that we behave in an ethical manner.  The keys to ethical behaviour are:
Accept other's opinion and actions in a non-judgmental way.
Understand what is sexist, racist, discriminatory and homophobic behaviour and challenge it .
Act with patience, understanding, care, concern and empathy.  Remember you may have dealt with the same issue numerous times, but for the student it is likely the first time.
Behave in ways that you can be personally proud of.
Approach each person as a brand new experience; don't carry over your feelings from one interaction to another.
Appreciate the merit in others regardless of your personal feelings.
Follow established procedures consistently and equitably

-----------------------------------------------------------
DISABILITY CUSTOMER SERVICES

If you're not sure how to help, a person with a disability, ask ‘How may I help you?".  People with disabilities know if they need help and will tell you how you can provide it.
Speak directly to the person.  If you can't understand what the person is saying, politely ask them to repeat it.
Don't assume.  Remember, some disabilities are non-visible and not everybody with the same disability experiences the same things.

Deaf/Hard of Hearing
People with hearing loss may be deaf, oral deaf, deafened, or hard of hearing.  People with hearing loss may use devices including hearing aids, special telephones, sign language interpreters, amplifiers, or a pen and paper.

Attract the person's attention before speaking by a gentle touch on the shoulder or a wave of your hand.  When speaking to deaf or hard of hearing persons, make sure they can clearly see your face.
Never shout to try to make yourself understood.  If the person uses a hearing aid, try to reduce background noise or move to a quieter area.
Deafblind
A person who is deafblind cannot see or hear to some degree.  A person may not be completely deaf and blind.  Individuals who are deafblind may have some residual vision and/or hearing.
Speak directly to the person.  A person who is deafblind will explain to you how to talk with them. 
People who are deafblind may have an intervenor, a professional who helps with communicating.  Identify yourself to the intervenor when you approach.

-----------------------------------------------------------
KNOW THE SERVICE STANDARDS

For any organization, no matter what their "business", quality assurance is paramount to ensuring customer satisfaction and consistency in service delivery.

Service standards clearly define the quality of service clients should expect to receive, the targets for key aspects of service such as timeliness, access and accuracy.
Research has shown that clients regard the following factors as 
critical to good service:
responsiveness		
competence			
easy access			
courtesy			
good communication	
credibility
reliability and accuracy
security
appearance of staff
attractive physical facilities

Attract the person's attention before speaking by a gentle touch on the shoulder or a wave of your hand.  When speaking to deaf or hard of hearing persons, make sure they can clearly see your face.
Never shout to try to make yourself understood.  If the person uses a hearing aid, try to reduce background noise or move to a quieter area.
Deafblind
A person who is deafblind cannot see or hear to some degree.  A person may not be completely deaf and blind.  Individuals who are deafblind may have some residual vision and/or hearing.
Speak directly to the person.  A person who is deafblind will explain to you how to talk with them. 
People who are deafblind may have an intervenor, a professional who helps with communicating.  Identify yourself to the intervenor when you approach.

-----------------------------------------------------------
KNOW THE SERVICE STANDARDS

For Information & Student Services and the Contact Centre there are three tools dealing with Quality Assurance.
	
Functional Area  Mission Statements and Customer
Service Visions: Identifies the core values we are committed to

Visit/Call Quality Scorecards
Identifies services and delivery levels staff are expected to provide.

Peer Feedback and Coaching Checklist
Process for staff to mentor each other and, share their experiences and tips within the team.

-----------------------------------------------------------
TIPS TO HELP WITH THE JOB

Carla Alvarez	
Read the calendars to know more about the programs, courses, and policies.
Do job shadowing for a little while when you start.
Take notes to remember banner codes, ext. numbers, fee codes, etc.
	
Seyhmus Yigit	
I would recommend to new staff to study GBC website. Our website is a great communication tool and has a lot of information on it.

Anna Samples	
My tip would be to become familiar with the college web page so that you would be able to access information easily.

Gifford Milado	
Be very patient with the customer and take your time. If unsure about the answer, never hesitate to ask around.
	
Stephen Flett	
Try not to let a poor experience get you down. Each subsequent student is a fresh opportunity for a good customer service experience.
	
-----------------------------------------------------------

PHRASES TO AVOID

1.	"I don't know."  
2.	"No."  
3.	"That's not my job."   
4.	"You're right - This stinks." 
5.	"That's not my fault." 
6.	"Calm down." 
7.	"I'm busy right now."
8.	Others you've heard? 

-------------------------------------------------------------

OUR WORKPLACE

N/A

-------------------------------------------------------------

THE TOOL KIT

How to find a resource:  
Each resource is divided into 3 main categories: Web Resources, Manuals & Important Documents, and Job Tools.  Within each category resource names are listed alphabetically.

To find the document you require hold your mouse over the category names.  A list of documents in that category will appear.  When you scroll over the name of the resource a short description will appear.  If you want to go to that resource click on the name.

NEED TO DISCUSS THIS FUNCTIONALITY PLEASE.

COLLEGE WIDE RESOURCES
What you will find in this resource:
Students come to us because they need assistance.  They trust that we will be providing them with complete, comprehensive and accurate service.  This tool will help you do that.  It is a list of web based resources that will help you in achieving remarkable service. 

RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION & STUDENT SERVICES AND THE CONTACT CENTRE
What you will find in this resource:
This tool contains links and descriptions of the various manuals, documents and job tools you will be using on a daily basis.remarkable service. 

-------------------------------------------------------------

TEST YOURSELF

Time to test yourself!  Click on the Test Yourself link below to access a short quiz on the material covered in this training tool.

When you open the link you may be asked if you want to enable the macros.  Click yes then save the file to your desktop. 

When you have completed it, save it again and email a copy to your manager.

